Foods That Stimulate Fat Burning
How to adjust your menu in order to lose weight and not limit yourself too
much on food? It's simple - with a keta diet. But you can also add certain
keto-friendly foods to your diet to help you do this faster. In this chapter, I
will tell you which foods you should add to your diet to speed up this
important fat burning process for us.
So, products that stimulate fat burning:
1. Almonds
Nuts contain a lot of Calories, but this does not mean that we get fat from
them. The myth that nuts lead to weight gain has long been outdated; healthy
fats and acids are beneficial to the whole body. And almonds, among other
things, help burn fat, as they have a positive effect on insulin levels and
feelings of fullness. In addition, almonds provide the body with magnesium,
which is beneficial for muscle regeneration.
2. Cinnamon
Oriental spices such as cinnamon, cardamom, and coriander are natural
metabolic rate boosters. Cinnamon is high in fiber and phytochemicals that
help regulate blood sugar levels. In addition, the seasoning contains a large
amount of antioxidants, they block free radicals and slow down the aging
process.
3. Grapefruit (limited quantities only!)
The bittersweet fruit contains virtually no fat or Calories and is great for
filling. Grapefruit contains the active ingredient naringin, and once ingested,
it stimulates digestion. As a result, we feel full. In addition, grapefruit has a
positive effect on insulin and cholesterol levels and cleanses the blood.
Keto dieters can eat small amounts of grapefruit by adding a few chunks to
salads, or by mixing the fruit with fatty yogurt or cheese.
4. Green tea
There are several reasons to drink green tea regularly: the catechins in tea
promote fat oxidation. Moreover, caffeine stimulates digestion and has a
cleansing effect on the gastrointestinal tract. The thermogenic substances in
tea help convert food energy into body heat, which speeds up the metabolism
and burns more Calories.
5. Ginger
The oleoresin contained in ginger provides the plant's sharpness, more fat is
burned from the thermogenic effect.
During the day, I prefer to make lemon-ginger cocktails. Or add ginger to
keto cocktails.
6. Avocado
Many people who lose weight fear avocados due to their high calorie and fat
content. However, this fruit contains beneficial unsaturated fatty acids as well
as vitamins, minerals, trace elements, and antioxidants. It helps the body
regulate hormonal balance and insulin levels and promotes stable and healthy
weight loss.
7. Chili
The capsaicin in chili peppers also stimulates digestion. In moderate doses,
the spice is very beneficial for the gastrointestinal tract, but if you overdo it,
you can harm the stomach. The measure is important here.
8. Chocolate (sugar-free cocoa powder)
The most unexpected product on our list. It is important to understand that
only dark chocolate with a cocoa content of more than 75 percent and no
sugar will have a positive effect. It also contains antioxidants. A bite or two
of keto-friendly chocolate after a meal will delight the sweet tooth and will
only be beneficial.
You can use my experience and make delicious hot chocolate - pour 2
tablespoons of cocoa and half a teaspoon of stevia with half a glass of boiling
water. Very tasty and satisfying!
9. Greek yogurt (limited quantities only!)
Greek yogurt with 10% fat (or more) is great for losing weight. It is a rich
source of protein that provides the body with energy for a long time,
regulates insulin levels, and helps to avoid carbohydrate cravings, which is
especially true in the morning and evening.
10. Quinoa (limited quantities only!)
Quinoa contains all nine essential amino acids. Grain stimulates metabolism
and thus contributes to weight loss. It is a balanced and healthy base product
that is perfect for lunch or dinner.
But it is important to remember that this product is also very rich in
carbohydrates, so it must be severely limited.