Keto Key Principles
So, you have already made the final decision to change your life for the better
by focusing on the lifestyle that is best for your health. You have committed
to starting a keto diet. You know why. Because of this, you will improve your
physical condition, increase your energy level, and mental clarity. You have
already taken an enormous step forward, but you are at the beginning of the
journey, and you have to figure out how to stick to the diet.
It's good that you are holding a short instruction in your hands, from which
you will understand how to stick to a diet and what you need to do for this.
One solution is not enough, and you simply have to make practical changes
in your lifestyle. If you do not live alone, then in the lifestyle of your family
too.
The keto diet doesn't have to be a temporary diet fad. It means a complete
change in the metabolism and lifestyle that you lead. After all, you need to
stay in ketosis. You need to make a low-carb, high-fat diet a long-term
transition to a better version of you.
It's a sustainable way of life to which you have to come. At the same time,
you must be prepared for various kinds of difficulties and unforeseen events.
It can be public events, workouts, going out to cafes, or anything else that can
initially lead you astray.
To avoid these mistakes (which I did too), you must follow the keto lifestyle
rules. Therefore, below you will find the basic principles of how to follow a
keto diet. You will learn how to reduce temptation, stay motivated, and make
keto work for you in the long run.
1. Write down why
For myself, I found out one thing: if it is not written down, then it is not done.
Therefore, you first need to understand why you want to start to go to the
keto diet. Second, write down the reasons you do it.
Are you looking to lose weight, lower your heart disease risk, get more
energy and clarity of mind, lower blood sugar, and cure diabetes? There can
be many reasons for the keto diet. You need to find out yours and write them
down.
It will be your primary motivator to move to a healthy lifestyle. Over time,
we forget everything. Therefore, as a reminder, it should be placed in a
conspicuous place - for example, on the refrigerator. You can also make it a
screensaver on your phone or computer. In this way, you will always
remember why you are doing it, and it will be one of the tools to keep you on
the right track.
2. Clean the refrigerator and food cabinets
When you first go on a keto diet, you should remove all old foods from there.
Throw away all expired foods. Also, donate all high carbohydrate foods to
charity or throw them in the trash as a last resort. You don't need it anymore!
Then wash the refrigerator and cupboards well. It will mean giving up the old
and starting your new lifestyle.
At the initial stage, your hands will take whatever they want and put it in
your mouth, and you will understand only later. Therefore, it will help reduce
the temptation to eat foods that are not on your meal plan. Thus, we can
deceive your body: what it does not see does not exist for it.
If you don't live alone, this can pose several hurdles, especially if your family
members are not on a keto diet. Therefore, if possible, try to involve your
family in a healthy lifestyle. You can say that this is temporary. I guarantee
they will like it later.
If you still received a refusal - do not back down. Behave like a real
negotiator - put forward reciprocal demands. For example, replace some
foods with low-carb alternatives or keep these items hidden in cabinets or
freezers (as long as you keep them out of the line of sight).
3. Find support from family and friends
Even if you want to start a diet for the right reasons, you can get negative
reviews from friends or family. Especially when it comes to keto. Indeed, for
many, this diet firmly turns the established ideas about nutrition in general.
Therefore, your decision can be made with a degree of criticism or negativity.
Get ready for this.
But you must understand that any doubts that come from your loved ones are
(mainly) due to ignorance of the principles of this diet. And they worry about
you because it's unusual for them. Just try to explain to your friends (and
family) that you are doing this to form healthy eating habits that will make
your life better.
You can also ask for support. It can encourage your loved ones to join you on
your journey.
4. Know the side effects (and get ready for it)
Of all the ketogenic diet nuances, there is one crucial effect you should be
prepared for: the ketogenic flu. Of course, it refers to when you are already
active (follow the keto rules), and your body is trying to burn even more fat.
For the first week or ten days, you may feel weak or tired. Walking up the
stairs can get very exhausting. It happens that keto causes constipation or can
potentially cause diarrhea due to changes in dietary fiber.
To do this, you should choose a start date for the day when your week will be
comfortable enough, without various deadlines and other obligations. Choose
a slower period when you can rest when needed. Give your body time to
adapt.
5. Plan your meals in advance
A great way (and one of the most important in my experience) to stay on
track with the keto diet is to plan your meals well in advance. If you are
revising your calendar (or your action plan) every week, determine how
many meals you need for the week (including snacks). As you go this route,
consider office break times, social obligations, or other unusual situations
(such as business meetings, especially in a cafe or restaurant) that may affect
your daily routine.
Once you've figured out how many meals you need, look for the keto-recipes
for each day of the week that you want to eat. Then you can understand what
you need for this and make a shopping list. Go to the grocery store (not
hungry), take everything on the list, and then set aside 1-2 hours each week to
prepare food. It will be your investment because it will help you stick to your
meal plan and save time down the road. And please, in the beginning, use
convenient and straightforward recipes.
6. Keto is a long term solution
If you are just looking for a new weight-loss method, then this one won't be
suitable. Keto is a fulfilling lifestyle that needs to be maintained over the long
term.
Make keto work for you - turn it into your lifestyle. If you like sweets (I just
can't live without it) - keep keto desserts or sweet fat bombs on hand. You
can cook a batch and put it in the freezer.
If you work (and dine) outside the office or travel frequently, find out what
keto-friendly restaurants you can order from. Only when you turn this into
your way of life, then imperceptibly for yourself, smoothly and gradually you
will realize all the benefits of this way of life.
7. Be prepared
Forming new habits takes time. On average, about a month. And when you
start a keto diet, it can be difficult to navigate social situations. Therefore,
you can plan what kind of food you can eat at these social events. A similar
situation when you are planning a vacation - determine in advance what you
will eat and what you will refuse.
If you visit a friend, always offer to bring the dish yourself - your ketofriendly
container with food will help you not eat the proposed cupcake or
pizza.
Also, try to keep low-carb snacks on hand. Snack options like chopped
vegetables, nuts, keto-friendly yogurt, hard-boiled eggs, or a fatty bomb can
help you avoid snacking on fast foods.
8. Use the macro calculator
If you ask, how will this calculator help you, my answer is that this "app" will
help you identify your unique needs to achieve your goals. Moreover, it will
help you track your keto macros accurately and stop guessing what and how
much to eat.
My main rules are: (1) to plan what and how much you eat; (2) enter it into
the macro calculator; (3) weigh it; and (4) then eat. This culture of eating well
organizes and helps to achieve the long-awaited results faster. You can start
using this from the second or third week of keto when your body is already
prepared for the regimen.