Possible Mistakes To Avoid
Fear of eating more fat
People often lack fat when they start keto because our society believes that
dietary fats will make you fat.
Since you are limiting your carbohydrate intake, it is essential that you
replace the missing Calories and the best source is fat. If you don't get enough
nutrients, it can impair your hormonal function or metabolism in the long run.
You may also feel uncomfortable because you do not consume enough
micronutrients and macronutrients found in the right fats.
Also, your body needs superior nutrition to prepare itself to burn fat in
ketosis. And if you start keto, you need to consume more fat, which will help
your body adapt to using ketones as a new fuel source.
Lack of the right fats (vitamins and minerals)
Lack of the right fats and, along with them, micronutrients can cause a wide
range of health problems. The body must receive all of this; otherwise, it may
come with consequences: fatigue, depression, or weight gain.
A successful keto diet plan should consist of a wide variety of food high in
nutrients and low carbohydrates. It means that you need greens, parsley,
avocado, sea fish, and other healthy foods.
Remember, not all foods have the same nutritional value. Avoiding
carbohydrates and adding buttercream, coconut, or MCT oil to coffee can
lead to ketosis, but that doesn't mean your body gets all the micronutrients it
needs.
Prioritize your nutrition correctly. Remember that the most crucial thing in
any business is safety and health, well-being, and vitality. Weight loss is
secondary. Therefore, you must saturate your body daily with nutritious
micronutrients found in grass-fed beef, eggs, avocados, leafy greens, herbs,
broccoli, and especially parsley!
Not drinking enоugh water
Regardless of which diet you're on, it's essential to stay hydrated. And when
your body is adjusting to fats for fuel, water intake should be increased. Thіѕ
is because саrbоhуdrаtеѕ аrе responsible for storing wаtеr іn thе bоdу. Whеn
уоu limit уоur carb intake, water is excreted along with electrolytes, whісh
mеаnѕ thеу muѕt bе replenished.
The gеnеrаl rulе оf thumb іѕ to drink 0.5 оz tо 1 oz оf wаtеr per pound оf
bodyweight. Others lіkе tо gauge thеіr hydration lеvеlѕ by urіnе соlоr. If іt’ѕ
a dаrkеr уеllоw, drіnk mоrе wаtеr. If it's сlеаr, you’re іn thе clear.
Consuming more carbs than recommended levels
Some people don't stick to the recommended <5% carbs for the ketogenic
diet. Some may be confused about precisely a low-carb diet, believing that
fewer than 3 ounces of carbs per day are "low-carb."
No problem as long as you get 3 ounces of carbs per day from unprocessed
carbs. However, quick drinks like sodas and ripe fruits can dramatically
increase your carbohydrate intake, forcing you to take in more than you need
to. It can lead to higher blood glucose levels, leading to higher insulin levels.
Inadequate sodium intake
Sodium is excreted from the body in the water when your body uses ketones
for energy.
If you don't eat enough sodium on a keto diet, you will fall prey to the keto
flu because this is the reason for the lack of electrolyte replacement. To
prevent this, increase your sodium intake, salt each meal by adding pink
Himalayan or sea salt to the water and drink it throughout the day. You can
also use sodium-rich mineral water.
Too much dairy
While dairy products may seem like an ideal food source that is low in
carbohydrates and high in fat, it is straightforward to overeat. If you don't
keep track of the amount of dairy you eat, you may exceed your daily calorie
intake.
Also, dairy products contain a specific type of protein that can lead to
unwanted spikes in insulin. When this happens, you can come out of ketosis.
I also want to disappoint you - many dairy products contain sugar, so it's
important always to check the nutritional label when buying this.
Too many snacks
If you're on a ketogenic diet, you don't need to snack. Over time, two meals a
day will be enough for you. The keto diet has a specific effect - it eliminates
hunger. It means that when you're in ketosis, your snack cravings should
disappear. You can incorporate intermittent fasting into your keto diet over
time. It will provide a powerful effect.
Snacking too much can lead to high blood sugar levels. This error can put
you out of ketosis. If you feel the need for a snack, it usually means that your
food was not fatty or nutritious enough. Therefore, you can try increasing
your meal size to get enough Calories throughout the day.
Too many nuts
While nuts are an excellent snack for those on a keto diet, too many will take
you out of your macro and can also take you out of ketosis. Nuts are high in
Calories. For example, 3 ounces of almonds are equivalent to 600 Calories. It
doesn't mean that you should altogether avoid eating nuts. What you can do is
lower your overall consumption of this.
Eating foods labeled "low in carbohydrates"
It's not hard to fool yourself, especially if the product is labeled "low in
carbohydrates." The point is that foods that are marked as such contain many
unhealthy additives. Firstly, keto is about health, and secondly, it can lead to
the fact that water in the body will be retained. You will not achieve the
desired results, and even worse - to bring you out of ketosis.
Don't plan your meals
If you are not planning a diet, it can quickly bring you out of ketosis. It is
helpful to plan your meals to avoid over-eating and snacking. While it is
impractical to keep track of your diet all the time, you can prepare food so
that you don't have to eat something randomly. Remember one of the basic
rules - first plan it, then enter into the macro calculator. Secondly, cook it,
weigh it, and after all, eat it (no more than planned).
Not getting enough exercise
Lack of exercise is counterproductive to the keto diet. Select the appropriate
activity, depending on your goals. To get the most out of your exercise
health, you can do light cardiovascular exercise as it works for both the mind
and heart. Weight training and high-intensity training can also build muscle.
On the other hand, post-workout nutrition is also critical to success on a
ketogenic diet. Avoid eating high-fat foods while exercising.
Not sleeping enough
If you don't get enough sleep, you are not living to your fullest. Your body
cannot fully recover. It prevents you from functioning optimally.
I'm well aware from my own experience that lack of sleep increases sugar
cravings and increases stress levels, which directly affects ketone production.
Aim to get at least seven to eight hours of sleep every night. The limited
screen uses one to two hours before bed. It will help your body perform
better.
Consuming too much protein
You must remember that a low-carb ketogenic diet's primary goal is to
consume healthy fats, not protein, as we all know that protein is an essential
macronutrient that can improve satiety and increase fat burning. According to
this belief, more protein should lead to weight loss and significantly improve
body composition. However, the problem is that people who follow a lowcarb
diet and consume lean animal proteins end up overeating them.
When you eat more protein than your body needs, it can prevent your body
from going into ketosis. Thus, you need to limit your protein intake to 15% or
less of your total diet. The ideal ketogenic diet should be low carb, high in
fat, and moderate in protein.
Worrying too much about weight
The ketogenic diet is known for its power in losing weight, but the scale does
not always show the desired value.
When you start keto, you will experience weight loss due to water in the early
days. But then, as your body adjusts to this new diet, it will retain moisture a
little better.
Checking your weight several times a day is one of the most common
mistakes. First, weight fluctuates naturally throughout the day. Secondly, you
need to weigh yourself as athletes do - in the morning, before eating on the
competition day. Third, if you don't get the results you want quickly, it can be
demotivating.
And you know what - the best indicator to measure is your morale, as well as
the general body composition and the level of body fat.
If you gradually gain muscle and lose fat, you are on the right track (muscle
is smaller but heavier than fat). But at the same time, your scales may tell you
otherwise.
Forewarned is forearmed. If you know what you can't do, you automatically
know what you can and should do. Therefore, avoid these mistakes for the
best results on a ketogenic diet.
The keto lifestyle has tremendous psychological and physical benefits, but
only when you follow an adequately formulated keto lifestyle.
Instead of focusing on restricting carbohydrates or losing weight, focus on
improving your quality of life. Make sure you get enough sleep and eat
healthy, tasty, and varied foods. Drink enough fluids, remember to eat
sodium, and do your favorite types of exercise.
If you follow these guidelines, you will burn ketones for fuel more efficiently
to experience all keto benefits.