Tricks To Defeat Extra Pounds
#one. Fancy a cookie cutter? Or something else? Drink a glass of water first -
often thirst is disguised as hunger.
#two. Another quick appetite test is to look at an apple. You feel like eating it
- you are really hungry; no - the reason is not the food.
#three. Chew a mint leaf. She fantastically fights even a brutal appetite.
#four. Have a rest! Proven: Tired people eat more.
#five. Eat slowly. The feeling of fullness is 20-25 minutes late.
#six. 1-2 glasses of water 15 minutes before lunch or dinner reduces appetite.
#seven. Make alternative decisions. Want some ice cream? Go for a lemonginger
smoothie - it is low in Calories and can help you lose weight.
#eight. The fear hormone cortisol stimulates the appetite and turns off the
head. Level off sensitive situations and avoid quarrels if you do not want to
get better.
#nine. Always dine at the table, but not on the run or in between.
#ten. Eat from small plates. This is a "correct cheat" for the brain - the
portions subconsciously look larger.
#eleven. But the fork, on the contrary, should be as large as possible - eat
10% less.
#twelve. Another mental trick is blue and green plates. They tame our
appetites. Unlike red, orange and yellow, which make us eat more.
#thirteen. Eat (keto-friendly) berries between meals, not afterwards, as a
dessert - reduce their calorie content.
#fourteen. Strawberries boost metabolism. Seize the moment before the
berry of beauty and harmony has not yet disappeared from the shelves!
#fifteen. Do you want sweets? The strong smell of vanilla can trick the brain
and make you feel full.
#sixteen. Add a slice of Parmesan to your lunch menu and you will feel full
faster and stay hungry longer.
#seventeen. Carbohydrates - only berries or and only until 17.00.
#eighteen. How do skinny Miranda Kerr and Jennifer Aniston start their
morning? Drink a glass of lemon water right in bed to kickstart your
metabolism.
#nineteen. Add a pinch of cinnamon to coffee or tea - speed up your
metabolism 20 (!) times.
#twenty. Write a “food diary” on your phone and write down everything you
eat during the day. This is the best and most visual form to take control of
nutrition.
#twentyone. A teaspoon of sesame or flaxseed in a salad, yogurt, or smoothie
can help make your diet more effective.