Top-5 Keto Benefits
The ketogenic diet has long been world-famous because it is beneficial in
many areas of health.
Therefore, to motivate us to change our diet, it is essential to understand what
purpose it will work for and the main benefits of a ketogenic diet.
In this chapter, I have compiled a list of the top 10 health benefits of the
ketogenic diet. Losing weight and reducing dependence on food, reducing
inflammation, and improving cardiovascular health are just a few of the
benefits.
The keto diet is much more than a quick weight loss diet. It's a new way of
life with benefits that far outweigh your reflection in the mirror.
Read on to find out which is right for you.
1. Weight loss
Weight loss is one of the most cited health benefits of a ketogenic diet and,
most likely, the most motivating one when deciding to switch to it. And this
is understandable because, with keto, weight loss is real and practical. It's
possible for a straightforward reason: changing from a high carbohydrate and
carb-burning diet to a high-fat and fat-burning diet.
A high-carb diet causes many side effects such as bloating, weight gain, and
feeling unwell. But at the same time, carbohydrates serve as a source of
energy. In contrast, keto is very low in carbs and burns fat from your body for
life.
Yes, this is arguably the best part of keto for many. But no matter what shape
you are in, the ketogenic diet can do more than just help you achieve or
maintain your desired weight. On a keto diet, you can get enough delicious
foods rich in good fats.
It will kick-start the fat-burning metabolic process known as ketosis. Once
your body gets used to it, which can take from one to several weeks, it will
increase energy and physical activity.
2. Reducing food addiction
Have you ever imagined not feeling the cravings for food? It's entirely
possible with the keto lifestyle. Meals twice a day and no hunger. Once your
body gets used to the diet, it works differently - more efficiently. The body
will begin to burn the fats found in food and the body and never go back to
carbohydrates and sugar. Food cravings will fade over time, and you will feel
satisfied.
Are you wondering why this is happening? One reason is that fats are more
nutritious: fat contains 9 Calories per gram, while carbohydrates and proteins
have 4 Calories per gram. It is clear that fats saturate our body much better
and therefore keep the feeling of fullness longer. After all, fats provide as
much energy per gram as proteins and carbohydrates together!
Another reason is the state of ketosis. When your body goes into this state,
you no longer experience peaks and valleys in your blood sugar. It means that
there are no more surges in insulin, one of the hormones responsible for
feeling hungry. It is the leading cause of hunger on a high-carb diet, and
when you switch to keto, you leave it all behind and enjoy life without the
hunger that has plagued and uncomfortable for so long.
3. More energy
Do you know that your body can only store a certain amount of glycogen, the
fuel that your body uses on a high-carb diet? Therefore, you need to refuel if
you want to maintain your energy level continually. And the body always
reminds of this through the feeling of hunger.
But the great news is that your body already has a lot of fat to work with.
And it will do this when you start giving it other food - rich in healthy fats.
The body will switch to a state of ketosis, and it will have a source of energy
that will never run out.
Do you remember that time when you want to take a nap after eating a
carbohydrate-rich meal? Forget it with a new diet. It means that when you are
on the keto lifestyle, you will have a lot more energy and no desire to take a
nap over time!
4. Anti-inflammation effect
If you didn't know, inflammation is a normal process in the body. This is how
our immunity responds to infection, helps to treat it, and fight it. But
sometimes, too persistent and robust inflammation causes many unpleasant
symptoms: pain, swelling, joint stiffness, or fatigue.
When you are on a keto diet and in ketosis, your body produces ketones, a
powerful anti-inflammatory chemical. Also, the ketogenic diet itself promotes
the consumption of anti-inflammatory foods: eggs, olive oil, coconut oil,
avocados, and other foods high in omega-3s. As a result, you get a double
effect.
5. Greatest health benefits
All of the previous benefits of this diet can be overshadowed when you learn
how a ketogenic can help improve your health. In this paragraph, I will
summarize the main advantages of this, already scientifically proven at the
moment:
• Normalizes cholesterol level
• Improves blood pressure
• Relieves heart disease
• Improves brain function
• Treats epilepsy (the basis of the diet)
• Reverses type 2 diabetes
• Controls type 1 diabetes
• Enhances the work of the digestive system
• Can cure Alzheimer's disease
• Reduces the symptoms of Parkinson's disease and a lot more.
As you have seen, the ketogenic diet has significant health benefits in areas
ranging from metabolic health to heart and brain health.
As research continues, the body's response to the ketogenic diet becomes
more understandable. There are also new ways of how it can be used for
various wellness activities. I'm also confident that there will be many
discoveries soon about the benefits of a high-fat, moderate-protein, and lowcarb
diet. While this is happening, we can simply enjoy the ketogenic
lifestyle and get the desired results.