Chapter 13
SEVEN STEPS TO STARTING
YOUR KETO DIET
IT’S TIME TO set up your healthy keto diet so that you can dive in and begin the process. There is much to remember, so this chapter is purposefully straightforward and step-by-step. In the very forefront are the macronutrient levels for your healthy keto diet:
•	75 percent fats
•	20 percent proteins
•	5 percent carbs
Everything builds on that. When you feel you are ready and shift over to the Mediterranean-keto lifestyle, everything will build on those new macronutrient numbers.

STEPS FOR STARTING YOUR KETO DIET
Basically, you are going from where you are to where you want to be. That is point A to point B. And along the way your health goals are your constant source of motivation.
Step-by-step this is where your keto diet begins:
Step 1: Define your starting point.
These are the action steps to take:
•	Weigh yourself on a scale.
•	Take photos (optional).
•	Take body measurements (optional).
Record this information in a journal, on your phone, or somewhere that works for you. Defining your starting point may not feel important at the moment, but it will prove to be a valuable source of information as you move forward. It may also be a source of encouragement as you lose weight.

Step 2: Do the math.
These are the action steps to take:
1.	Decrease total daily food intake by about 20 percent.
2.	Apply your macronutrient levels:
*	75 percent fats
*	20 percent proteins
*	5 percent carbs
1. Calculate your calories per macro.
2. Convert calories to grams per macro.
For women
The average adult woman in the United States consumes around 1,600-2,400 calories in food per day. To lose weight, you want to decrease that to 1,600 calories per day while maintaining your healthy keto diet macros. (A 20 percent decrease in daily food intake is usually sufficient to cause weight loss, but 1,600 calories per day is a great starting point.)
Using the macro levels and 1,600 calories, that means 
3. •	1,200 calories from fats
   •	320 calories from proteins
   •	80 calories from carbs.
   For men
   The average adult male in the United States consumes around twenty-four hundred to 3,800 calories in food per day. To lose weight, you should decrease your food intake to 2,000-2,400 calories per day while maintaining your healthy keto diet macros. (A 20 percent decrease in daily food intake is usually sufficient to cause weight loss, but 2,000-2,400 calories per day is a great starting point.)
   Using the macro levels and 2,400 calories, that means
   •	1,800 calories from fats
   •	480 calories from proteins
   •	120 calories from carbs.
   According to the USDA, the calories-to-grams ratio for fats is 9 calories per 1 gram of fat, 4 calories per 1 gram of protein, and 4 calories per 1 gram of carbs. Doing the math for women at 1,600 calories per day, that is
   •	133 grams fats
   •	80 grams proteins

​           20 grams carbs.
For men at 2,400 calories per day, that is
200 grams fats
120 grams proteins
30 grams carbs. (I still usually start men on 20 grams carbs.)
Most people have no idea what their daily caloric intake is. If you want to track your calories for a day or two to give yourself a baseline, that is fine. Or you can simply choose a starting point (i.e., 1,600 calories for women, 2,000-2,400 calories for men) and begin. For most people, that is sufficient.
•	1 gram of fat = 9 calories
•	1 gram of carbs = 4 calories
•	1 gram of protein = 4 calories
For obese or bigger people, I often recommend that they decrease by 20 percent for two to four weeks, then decrease by another 20 percent, and so on, until they eventually reach the sixteen hundred (for women) or two thousand to twenty-four hundred (for men) threshold.

This creates more of a gradual weight loss plan.
You decide on your caloric intake per day. Whatever that starting point number is for you, begin there.
Step 3: Approximate your foods.
These are the action steps to take:
•	Approximate grams per macronutrient per meal.
•	Practice calculating macro amounts using real foods.
For women at 1,600 calories eating three meals per day, that means approximately
•	44 grams fats per meal (around 3.33 tablespoons fats per meal)
•	27 grams proteins per meal (around 4 ounces proteins per meal)
•	7 grams carbs per meal.
For men at 2,400 calories eating three meals per day, that means approximately
•	67 grams fats per meal (around 5 tablespoons fats per meal)
•	40 grams proteins per meal (around 6 ounces proteins per meal)
•	10 grams carbs per meal (or 7 grams per meal if you choose 20 grams carbs per day).

If you are starting at a different calories-per-day point than these, that’s fine. Just make sure you know what your daily goal is and divide that by your intended number of meals per day. For most people, I would recommend three meals per day to begin and later, once you reach nutritional ketosis, you can practice intermittent fasting and eat just two meals a day in an eight-hour window of time.
Once you have your approximate grams per macro per meal figured out, it’s time to start practicing. For example, a large egg has these approximate macronutrient numbers: 5 grams of fat, 6 grams of protein, and 0.6 grams of carbs.
So, for example, let’s say for breakfast you had
•	2 eggs (10 grams fat, 12 grams protein, 1 gram carbs)
•	2 thin slices of turkey bacon (4.5 grams fat, 4.7 grams protein, 0.5 grams carbs)
•	/2 medium tomato (0.1 grams fat, 0.5 grams protein, 2.4 grams carbs)
•	1 medium avocado (24 grams fat, 3 grams protein, 3 grams carbs)
•	Totals: 38.6 grams fat, 20.2 grams protein, 6.9 grams carbs.
From this example breakfast, a woman eating 1,600 calories in a day would be almost on target for fats per meal, a little shy on proteins per meal, and on target for carbs per meal. She would need to add a little more protein, maybe as a snack (e.g., nuts) later in the morning.
For a man eating 2,400 calories in a day, this breakfast would get him only partway there. He would especially need more fats and proteins, but the carbs are still about right.
Begin to practice figuring out the macros (fats, proteins, and carbs) with healthy foods and using that information per meal.
Thankfully all this math and these calculations per food and recipes have already been figured out. It’s good to be able to find out (online especially) what the macronutrients are per food item, but you don’t have to build your entire recipe list on your own (unless you want to).
There are many keto recipes out there. Included in part 3 of this book are several recipes for starting a Mediterranean-keto lifestlye, including several strictly keto meal ideas that will help you as you begin your healthy keto weight loss journey.
Step 4: Choose your meals.
These are the action steps to take:
•	Choose the meals you want to eat.
•	Make sure the macronutrients are met per meal.
With so many keto recipes available, whether online or in the back of this book, you simply need to choose the meals you want to eat that match what you need for your macronutrient amounts per meal. Start with basic and easy meals, with lots of salads. The more you plan ahead and prepare, the less spontaneous you will need to be—and it’s very hard to be spontaneous and hit your macronutrient goals when you are doing something new.

Later on, after you get a feel for your ketosis and food counts, you can be more creative and last-minute in your meals. But for now it’s better (and easier on you) to plan ahead. I suggest planning ahead for a full week. That way you can shop in advance and won’t have to think so much about it.
Don’t worry, you will get a hang of this as you go!
Step 5: Restock your fridge and pantry.
These are the action steps to take:
•	Clean out what you don’t want.
•	Restock with what you do want.
This is often a light-bulb moment, one of those aha moments when people realize what they’ve been eating. When you look at the foods in your pantry’, you may do the same. For example,
•	one regular bagel: 1 gram fat, 9 grams protein, 55 grams carbs
•	one cup 2 percent milk: 4.8 grams fat, 8 grams protein, 12 grams carbs
•	one large banana: 0.5 grams fat, 1.5 grams protein, 31 grams carbs
•	one cup cooked oatmeal: 3.6 grams fat, 5.9 grams protein, 28 grams carbs.

Quite often the moment you count the carbs in something, you know immediately whether it’s an option.
No matter how healthy something might be, while you are on a healthy keto diet, you simply need to stick to your fat, protein, and carb macronutrient numbers. That’s going to require you to clean certain things out of your fridge and pantry and replace them with healthy low-carb, medium-protein, and high-fat options.
You can spend the time doing the calculations per item in your fridge and pantry, but in the end you will find pretty much that everything that is in a box, bag, or can has too many carbs in it or the fats are unhealthy. Out go the breads, cereals, baked goods, oats, pasta (of any sort), rice, potatoes, flour (regular and wheat), sugar (liquid, granulated, or powder), creamers, cookies, ice cream, syrups, sodas, juices, granola bars, oils (vegetable, canola, soybean), margarine, alcohol, and so on. Even dried fruits like cranberries, raisins, and dates or raw fruits like bananas, grapes, oranges, and mangoes need to go-
When in doubt, look up the food item and see what the macronutrient numbers are to see if it fits with your healthy keto diet plans. If you have beans, peas, or lentils in bags, you can put those on a back shelf for later. When you shift over to the Mediterranean-keto lifestyle, you will want these items again.
In place of these items, you will want to restock your fridge and pantry with foods that fit your healthy keto diet. These same items will also fit the Mediterranean-keto lifestyle, so doing this now will help you in the future. They will also work with the keto recipes in this book and others you find.
Following is a good base of what should be in your fridge and pantry. (See appendix D for a complete list)
•	oils—extra-virgin, cold-pressed olive and avocado especially (in dark glass containers): MCT oil (powder or liquid): coconut, almond, walnut, and macadamia oils (preferably cold-pressed)
•	vegetables—arugula, cabbage, cucumbers, broccoli, celery, spinach, kale, chard, romaine, artichokes, green beans. Brussels sprouts, olives, radish, cauliflower, greens (collard, mustard, dandelion), asparagus, garlic, mushrooms, onions, yellow squash, zucchini, spaghetti squash, peppers, eggplant, and tomatoes
•	low-sugar fruits—strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, blueberries, limes, lemons, plums, clementines, kiwi, cantaloupe, watermelon
•	fresh dried herbs—ginger, oregano, basil, cilantro, parsley, thyme, rosemary, sage, mint, bay leaves, cumin, curry powder, paprika, black pepper, cayenne pepper, red pepper flakes, cinnamon, cardamom, etc.
•	nuts'seeds—almonds, walnuts, Brazil nuts, peanuts, pecans, macadamias, cashews, hazelnuts, pine nuts, pistachios, chia, flax, hemp, pumpkin, sesame, etc.
•	pickled fermented foods—unsweetened kefir or yogurt (especially coconut, goat, and sheep), dill pickles, kimchi, sauerkraut, miso, apple cider vinegar, banana peppers, capers, olives, pickled jalapenos, etc.
•	condiments—mustard, avocado mavo, pesto, low- or no-sugar hot sauces, sugar-free ketchup, low-carb Italian dressing, red wine vinegar, balsamic vinegar
•	meats—pasture-raised poultry and eggs; wild or sustainably harvested fish, shrimp, oysters, etc.; grass-fed beef, bison, pork, sheep, goat, etc.; wild deer, rabbit, elk. turkey bacon, smoked wild salmon, etc. (bacon and sausage one or two times a week)
•	dairy (to be limited to less than 10 percent of your total daily fat intake)—feta, grass-fed ghee, grass-fed butter, sour cream, heavy whipping cream, cheese, cream cheese, unsweetened yogurt, almond milk, coconut milk
•	broths—chicken, beef, bone
•	natural sweeteners—stevia, monk fruit, erythritol, inulin, tagatose. and xylitol
•	coffee, tea. and water (filtered) or sparkling water
•	fiber (psyllium husk powder)
•	dark chocolate (70 percent or higher cacao)
•	healthy carbs to be added in the Mediterranean-keto lifestyle—beans (black, green, snap, pinto, red. kidney, garbanzo, lima. navy, white, lupini). lentils, peas (green and black-eyed), sweet potatoes, yams, cassava, taro root, gluten-free bread or gluten-free pasta, basmati white rice, millet bread, low-sugar fruits, and other healthy carbs
•	supplements (See appendix A, “Recommended Supplements.”)

It will take a little while for this to become a habit, so be patient with yourself. I have found that the more expensive items (i.e., wild fish or grass-fed beef) are foods that we don’t eat every day. Oils and vegetables are relatively inexpensive, and these we use daily for fats and healthy carbs.
Step 6: Set up an exercise routine.
These are the action steps to take:
•	Decide how much exercise you want to do.
•	Make that exercise a habit.
Walking fifteen to twenty minutes per day is a good starting point for everyone on a keto diet. For many, that will be enough for the first few months. It will help with the weight loss and getting the metabolism in line.
For others, that is not enough. They want to do more, such as thirty’ to forty-five minutes per day. If that is you, that’s fine; just remember that intense exercise may be more than your low-carb keto diet can handle, so increasing your carbs or taking exogenous ketones or MCT oil powder may be necessary (as discussed in the last chapter) on those high-intensity exercise days.
Starting low and going slow is recommended, but whatever you wish to do, make sure you build it into your daily and weekly schedule. Quite simply, make it a habit.

Step 7: Measure your progress.
These are the action steps to take:
•	Decide that you will track your macronutrients.
•	Track your food intake for at least four weeks.
There is an old saying, “If you can measure it, you can manage it.” With your keto diet, that is especially good advice when you are first getting started. It takes twenty-one days to create a habit, so track your food intake for at least your first foil month. That means you count the macronutrients of every meal, snack, or beverage.
Some people prefer to continue tracking for six to twelve months, and that can prove to be helpfol (especially if weight loss plateaus), but most people don’t want to spend the time and effort to track the macronutrients of their food. But for the first month, you really should track carefolly. If you can begin to train your mind to think, “Tracking is my friend,” it will help you.
What if it takes you longer to reach ketosis? Then you simply need to keep on tracking your macronutrients until at least a week after you reach that point. (Measuring your ketone levels is also helpfol at this time.) The whole point of tracking the macronutrients is knowing where you are on your keto journey. After all, the primary reasons for weight loss plateaus and falling out of ketosis: too many carbs, too many proteins, and not enough healthy fats. And how will you know that if you aren’t tracking?

After achieving ketosis, a lot of people will continue forward with a “close enough” mindset, and that can work. They are more likely to be in and out of ketosis, and their weight loss is usually more gradual, but it works for them and they get the results they want, more or less. As you would expect, being a little more than “close enough” will get you much better results.
Based on the results of hundreds of patients who have started a keto diet, I have found this common thread: those who track more carefully are almost always going to get better results. They usually reach ketosis more quickly, lose more weight, have shorter weight loss plateaus, and are generally healthier.
How you track is really up to you. Some do it manually, and some prefer apps that help keep them accountable. There are many keto apps and keto calculators to choose from. I often recommend this one as a good starting point: https://calculo.io/keto-calculator.
SUMMARY OF KETO DIET STEPS

These are the seven steps to starting your keto diet:
Step 1: Define your starting point.
Step 2: Do the math.
Step 3: Approximate your foods.
Step 4: Choose your meals.
Step 5: Restock your fridge and pantry.
Step 6: Set up an exercise routine.
Step 7: Measure your progress.
This is the launching point where you jump into your keto diet journey. You are armed with more than enough knowledge. You have a motivating reason for jumping in. You have all that it takes. It’s going to be great! Having a keto partner or support group will help many stay on course and achieve their weight loss goals.
Congratulations! As you begin, know that you are starting the best, most effective, and healthiest keto diet in existence. The proven results speak for themselves. Here’s to your health and your health goals!
And after you achieve your desired weight and other health goals, you are welcome to shift over to the Mediterranean-keto lifestyle. I’ll see you there!

